the Israeli military says two Russian
Israeli women released by Hamas
militants have now entered Israel Hamas
which is considered a terrorist
organization by multiple countries is
expected to hand over 10 more hostages
to the International Red Cross as part
of the TRU deal with Israel their
release comes on the final day of the
extended truce Qatari mediators have
been pushing both sides to agree on
further extensions of the
ceasefire we can now bring Martin aach
he's a psychiatrist and psychotherapist
and currently aa's National Clinical
Director in Israel welcome to DW so
great to see you it's been five days
since the first hostages were released
what do we know about what Emily and the
others went through and how they were
treated in
captivity um good evening uh first of
all we don't know very much uh besides
what we hear in the
news uh because uh they were taken a lot
of precautions to have the children all
the hostages that come back to Israel um
stay in privacy so that they don't have
to meet the media immediately and tell
the story they were isolated in some way
and meeting first of all their
families and they were given a chance to
tell the stories and whatever happened
to them whenever they feel fit for that
whenever they ready for that for some it
may be immediately and for some it may
take some time specifically I think
about the
children uh there were children who were
2 years old 3 years old four years old
uh
adolescents and um for each of them it
takes some time to tell the story yeah
and we can only imagine what they must
have witnessed what they must have gone
through can you tell us about how this
kind of traumatic experience affects
children especially if like many of the
hostages freed now they don't have a
parent by their side when they get
home yeah first of all one one has to
say that generally children are much
more uh vulnerable to traumatic events
than adolescence you have to think that
children don't have uh so much uh life
experience they don't have a personality
that is so much U Already um um um I
would say uh developed and they uh they
have very much the need to be together
with parents or other caregivers so what
we know about the children that were uh
in Gaza we know that part of them were
kept in
houses uh above the ground and part of
them were underground in
tunnels we know about at
12-year-old uh hostage who told us that
on the way to uh the place where it was
kept he was beaten by all people around
and then he was kept for 16 days in
solitary confinement which was extremely
difficult and afterwards he was allowed
to join others whom he knows from his
kibuts or from where he came from and
then it
became much easier iier for you that
sounds for those who were for those who
were together with their mothers it was
easier for those who were separated from
the mothers it was really very much
difficult now apart from you know love
and hugs from their families and
everybody who's welcoming them back home
what kind of professional support do
these children need
now well the first thing was that there
was a big
question how should he get the news how
should he be updated about what happened
in the last 50 days some of them did not
know that part of the family members
were killed and they had to hear the
news um the military who um took them uh
On the Border uh got an order not to
tell these news these are news that were
given by family members
that's the first thing and then they
were asked how they want to be in the
first days whom they want to meet and um
so gradually to be open to the
surrounding they will not be meeting all
their friends and all the kibuts members
at the beginning we start very very uh
small family close family and then open
up gradually they even were told that
they can stay in the hospital as long as
they need and then they can choose where
to go after being in a hostage where you
don't have any choice yeah to do what
you want to do you were told when to go
to to bed when to talk this is what
children tell us they were told not to
talk loudly a small child 9 years old
came back and is just Whispering now she
can not talk normally again because
she's afraid to talk aloud you
understand so it needs time now how
therapy will be uh over the next uh uh
periods of times it's very difficult to
know there are children and Adolescent
and adults who are very strong and
really can cope and recuperate
relatively easily and there are people
who need for many many years
uh treatment yeah so it's very
individual you cannot know it in the in
in the beginning you have to follow them
and just another point that it's very
important not only to give professional
help to the victims to the people who
were captured to the hostages but their
family members need a lot of help sure
one day at a time that was Martin aak
head of the Haru Institute thank you so
much thank you good
evening Sami so is in Jerusalem and has
more Sami what's the latest on today's
releases well the latest development is
that those 10 Israeli hostages and we're
talking about five women and five
children have been handed over uh to the
International Red Cross in the Gaza
Strip so there has been that Handover
that we've been waiting waiting for many
hours apparently there were some
logistic issues earlier two women came
in these are women that were given a
gesture to Vladimir Putin
to Nationals that are both Israeli and
Russian and they've been received by
crowds that were waving the Israeli flag
one of them is a 50-year-old woman and
her 73y old mom at the same time I can
tell you that north of Jerusalem in the
betunia area you have a Palestinian
families that are waiting for the
release of 30 Palestinian
prisoners and now that today's group of
hostages has be handed over as you say
uh does that mean that the truce will be
extended yes the plan plan is that this
truth will be
extended there's still negotiation as to
who will be on this
list
um Hamas has some difficulties and it
has said that it is having difficulties
in in finding some of the hostages
because the hostages are kept by various
factions inside the Gaza Strip but there
is an agreement already with Israel that
some of those that will be in the coming
uh batches will be also men elderly men
so we we can expect at least for
tomorrow and the day after to have a
similar formula of releasing of 10
Israeli hostages and in return Israel
will be will be releasing 30 Palestinian
prisoners then of course there will have
to be more
negotiations for kind of like a bigger
uh a bigger PR program or maybe a
ceasefire yeah while these diplomatic
efforts continue the Israeli Army says
there is an anti-terrorist operation
underway in the West Bank what's
happening
there indeed there was a large scale
operation in Janine in the Janine
refugee camp the standoff lasted more
than 13 hours uh during the this
operation a a very senior commander of
the fighters in the Janine Camp
something known as
the the the Janine Brigade which is
affiliated with Islamic Jihad a person
known as Muhammad zabi he was killed an
associate of his was killed but maybe
more shocking uh we saw there a a
killing of an eight-year-old child
and a and we also saw another
15-year-old Palestinian child that was
killed so we're talking about a very
aggressive campaign also in the abina
hospital in Janine and we've also seen
Israeli military going into the camp
with bulldozers and destroying the
infrastructure of the camp the Civil
infrastructure of the camp that was
journalist Sami soal in Jerusalem thanks
for the
latest now in return for Hamas freeing
hostages Israel has been releasing
Palestinians held in Israeli jails by
Tuesday a total of 180 Palestinians had
been released thew correspondent Tanya
krer reports on one of them a
17-year-old whose family says he was
arrested and detained after throwing
Molotov
cocktails for days now a man M has been
anxiously waiting for this moment her
17-year-old son Ham was expected to be
released from an Israeli prison as part
of the delicate truce agreement between
Israel and
Hamas he's been in prison for 10 months
I haven't heard from him since October
7th I'm just waiting for him to come
home and then a moment of joy and
relief Hamza was 16 when he was arrested
the Israeli prosecution accused him of
amongst other things supporting
terrorism Grievous bodily harm and arson
on nationalist grounds his family said
he was throwing Molotov cocktails he was
never sentenced he is one of the under
18yar olds that Israel agreed to release
from prison many are still being held in
administrative detention I'm just
excited to be among my people and with
my family I feel extremely happy
now nobody here wants to talk Politics
as there's fear that they could be
easily
rearrested Amani Al as a mother is
worried about her son's
health I'm upset my son wasn't like this
every week he had a haircut he was
wearing nice clothes he's not like he
used to be he's changed a
lot for now the family is just relieved
that their son is back
home